>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 7:
IN NEW HAMPSHIRE: WHITE HOUSE
HOPEFULS KNOCK ON DOORS AND
RALLY SUPPORTERS IN ADVANCE OF
TUESDAY'S PRIMARY.
FACT-CHECKING LAST NIGHT'S
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
MAKING A TAX CREDIT FOR LOW-
INCOME AMERICANS AVAILABLE TO
MORE PEOPLE.
>> WE ARE MOSTLY FOCUSED ON
POVERTY AS A CHILD PROBLEM.
IT'S BEEN VERY HARD TO BUILD
SUPPORT FOR WORKING POOR WHO
DON'T HAVE DEPENDENT CHILDREN.
>> Brangham: NEXT ON "PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
VOTERS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE ARE
GETTING THEIR LAST LOOKS AT THE
CANDIDATES ON THE BALLOT IN THE
FIRST-IN-THE-NATION PRESIDENTIAL
PRIMARY.
CANDIDATES STILL RUNNING HAVE
SPENT A TOTAL 444 DAYS ON THE
GROUND IN NEW HAMPSHIRE,
ACCORDING TO MANCHESTER T.V.
STATION WMUR, WHILE THE
CANDIDATES AND SUPER-PACS
SUPPORTING THEM HAVE SPENT A
COMBINED $84 MILLION IN THE
STATE ALONE, ACCORDING TO "THE
NEW YORK TIMES."
THAT'S A LOT OF TIME AND MONEY
TO WIN OVER THE ROUGHLY 500,000
PRIMARY VOTERS WHO'RE LIKELY TO
VOTE.
AND LAST NIGHT, SEVEN REPUBLICAN
CANDIDATES SHARED THE DEBATE
STAGE.
LEADING IN PRE-PRIMARY POLLS,
BUSINESSMAN DONALD TRUMP STOOD
CENTER STAGE.
>> WE'RE GOING TO WIN WITH
TRUMP.
WE'RE GOING TO WIN.
WE DON'T WIN ANYMORE.
OUR COUNTRY DOESN'T WIN ANYMORE.
>> Brangham: THE REPUBLICANS
EXPRESSED THEIR NEAR-UNITED
OPPOSITION TO HIGHER TAXES, NOT
EVEN FOR PEOPLE EARNING MORE
THAN A MILLION DOLLARS A YEAR,
SAID FLORIDA SENATOR MARCO
RUBIO.
>> I DON'T KNOW OF ANY PROBLEM
IN AMERICA THAT'S GOING TO BE
FIXED WITH A TAX INCREASE.
>> Brangham: BUT RUBIO WAS A
CONSISTENT TARGET LAST NIGHT.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNOR CHRIS
CHRISTIE LED THE CHARGE, SAYING
THE 44-YEAR-OLD FRESHMAN SENATOR
WAS TOO INEXPERIENCED TO LEAD
THE NATION.
>> YOU HAVE NOT BEEN INVOLVED IN
A CONSEQUENTIAL DECISION WHERE
YOU HAD TO BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE.
YOU JUST SIMPLY HAVEN'T.
>> Brangham: CHRISTIE, WHO'S
TRYING TO BREAK OUT OF THE PACK,
REPEATEDLY ATTACKED RUBIO, EVEN
WHEN RUBIO LISTED HIS SENATE
RECORD.
>> THE FACT WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT
THE HEZBOLLAH SANCTIONS ACT THAT
YOU LIST AS ONE OF YOUR
ACCOMPLISHMENTS YOU JUST DID,
YOU WEREN'T EVEN THERE TO VOTE
FOR IT.
THAT'S NOT LEADERSHIP, THAT'S
TRUANCY.
>> Brangham: TEXAS SENATOR TED
CRUZ, WHO ONCE FILIBUSTERED TO
DEFUND PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HEALTHCARE PLAN, GOT A CHANCE TO
EXPLAIN HOW HE'D REPLACE IT.
>> WE WILL DE-LINK HEALTH
INSURANCE FROM EMPLOYMENT, SO
THAT YOU DON'T LOSE YOUR HEALTH
INSURANCE WHEN YOU LOSE YOUR
JOB, AND THAT WAY HEALTH
INSURANCE CAN BE PERSONAL,
PORTABLE AND AFFORDABLE.
>> Brangham: WHEN ASKED ABOUT
NORTH KOREA'S LATEST ROCKET
LAUNCH-- WHICH WAS REVEALED
RIGHT BEFORE THE DEBATE- MOST
CANDIDATES SAID THEY NEEDED MORE
INFORMATION.
BUT FORMER FLORIDA GOVERNOR JEB
BUSH WAS QUICK TO SAY HE WOULD
CONSIDER MILITARY ACTION.
>> THE NEXT PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES IS GOING TO HAVE
TO GET THE UNITED STATES BACK IN
THE GAME, AND IF A PREEMPTIVE
STRIKE IS NECESSARY TO KEEP US
SAFE, THEN WE SHOULD DO IT.
>> Brangham: WITH THE DEBATES
OVER, CANDIDATES ARE NOW FOCUSED
ON GETTING OUT THE VOTE.
OHIO GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH HAS
HELD 100 TOWN MEETINGS HERE.
>> WE GOT THE BEST ARMY IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE.
THEY'RE GOING TO KNOCK ON
EVERYBODY'S DOORS, WHETHER IT
RAINS, WHETHER IT SNOWS; IT
DOESN'T MATTER.
>> Brangham: DEMOCRAT HILLARY
CLINTON WON THIS PRIMARY BACK IN
2008.
>> IT'S A BEAUTIFUL DAY HERE IN
MANCHESTER!
>> Brangham: BUT THE FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE KNOWS HISTORY
MAY NOT REPEAT ITSELF.
SHE TRAILS VERMONT SENATOR
BERNIE SANDERS HERE AND
CRITICIZED HIM TODAY FOR
CONTINUALLY SAYING THAT SHE IS
BEHOLDEN TO WALL STREET DONORS.
>> WHAT THE SANDERS CAMPAIGN IS
TRYING TO DO IS LINK DONATIONS
TO MY POLITICAL CAMPAIGN OR
REALLY DONATIONS TO ANYONE'S
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN WITH UNDUE
INFLUENCE, WITH CHANGING
PEOPLE'S VIEWS AND VOTES.
I HAVE NEVER, EVER DONE THAT.
>> Brangham: SANDERS TODAY DID
CREDIT CLINTON'S EXPERIENCE, BUT
REPEATED HIS VIEW THAT HER
SENATE VOTE APPROVING THE 2003
IRAQ WAR SHOWED POOR JUDGMENT.
>> I WILL DO EVERYTHING THAT I
CAN TO MAKE SURE THAT OUR YOUNG
MEN AND WOMEN IN THE MILITARY DO
NOT GET SUCKED INTO A PERPETUAL
WARFARE IN THE QUAGMIRE OF THE
MIDDLE EAST."
>> Brangham: THAT WAS A MORE
SERIOUS TURN THAN HIS SELF-
DEPRECATING CAMEO IN A "SATURDAY
NIGHT LIVE" SKIT INSPIRED BY THE
TITANIC.
>> I'M SO SICK OF THE ONE
PERCENT GETTING THIS
PREFERENTIAL TREATMENT.
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH!
>> Brangham: THE "NEWSHOUR'S"
POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS IS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
COVERING THE PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN AND JOINS ME NOW FROM
MANCHESTER.
>> I KNOW YOU'VE BEEN AT A BUNCH
OF THESE CAMPAIGN EVENTS BOTH
DEMOCRATIC AND REPUBLICAN
EVENTS, WHAT ARE THE KINDS OF
PEOPLE WHO ARE SHOWING UP AT
THESE THINGS?
>> WILLIAM IT'S FASCINATING.
YOU SEE ACTUALLY MORE THAN I
EVER HAVE BEFORE ON THE PUBLIC
POLITICAL TOUR.
IT TAKES TEN, 15 MINUTES
SOMETIMES TO FIND A NEW
HAMPSHIRE VOTER, PEOPLE COMING
FROM NEW JERSEY, CONNECTICUT,
INDIANA, WISCONSIN.
IT'S HARD TO JUDGE FROM THE
CROWD SIZES, WHETHER A CANDIDATE
IS BRINGING IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
VOTERS.
SOME ARE HERE FOR THEATER, SOME
ARE HERE BECAUSE THEY WISH THEIR
STATES HAVE AS MUCH INFLUENCE AS
NEW HAMPSHIRE DOES.
ALSO AT THESE EVENTS I'M SEEING
UNDECIDED VOTERS, WHO ARE
WANTING TO MAKE A DECISION BUT
ARE HAVING TROUBLE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF SOFT VOTERS
ESPECIALLY ON THE REPUBLICAN
SIDE AND I WANT TO POINT OUT: I
HONESTLY DO NOT TRUST THE POLLS.
I'M A HUGE BELIEVER IN THE POLLS
BUT IN THIS INCIDENT, THEY HAVE
NOT RESPONDED TO POLLSTERS AND I
HAVE TWO POLLSTERS WHO ARE JUST
ANSWERING TRUMP, THEY SAY WHAT
THE POLLSTER WANTS TO HEAR AND
GET OFF THE PHONE.
PERHAPS POLLSTERS IT'S NOT
SOMETHING YOU CAN REALLY PUT
YOUR ENTIRE FAITH IN IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE.
THERE IS A LOT TO BE SAID AND
DECIDED STILL.
>> DO YOU HAVE ANY SENSE
DOING SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE, OR
CLINTON VISITING FLINT MICHIGAN,
THAT HAS LAST ANY INFLUENCE AT
ALL?
>> I THINK IT'S A KNOWLEDGE I
THINK THAT THE HILLARY CLINTON
CHAIN IS DINING GREAT JOB TRYING
TO SET EXPECTATIONS, IF SHE
LOSES JUST BY DOUBLE DIGITS THEY
WANT TO SAY THAT'S A WIN.
THEY ARE GOING ON THE ATTACK,
HILLARY CLINTON HELD A
CONFERENCE CALL REGARDING BERNIE
SANDERS FOREIGN POLICY, BERNIE
SANDERS SAID WAIT A MINUTE TEAM
CLINTON, YOU MADE THAT SAME
ATTACK ON A MAN NAMED BARACK
OBAMA IN 2008, SAYING HE WASN'T
READY FOR FOREIGN POLICY AND
LOOK WHAT HAPPENED THERE.
WE ARE SEEING CLEAR STRONG
POSITIONING FROM THOSE TWO
DEMOCRATS, I THINK MORE SO THAT
WILL GIVE THEM THE EXPECTATION
GAME IS REALLY WHERE IT'S AT.
ONE QUICK NOTE I WANT TO MENTION
ON THE REPUBLICAN SIDE, I WANT
TO TALK ABOUT JOHN KASICH, I
THINK HE'S IMPORTANT TO WATCH, I
JUST CAME FROM ONE OF HIS
EVENTS.
HE HAS THE ABILITY TO ENGAGE
WITH THE CROWD, LOW KEYED BUT
ENERGY THAT A LOT OF NEW
HAMPSHIRE RESIDENTS SEEM TO
LIKE.
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE NOTED THAT,
YOU SEE A LOT OF POLITICAL
SIGNS, WHEN YOU LOOK CLOSELY IN
THE INTERSECTIONS YOU SEE TONS
OF DONALD TRUMP SIGNS MAYBE TONS
OF JEB BUSH SIGNS YOU DRIVE ON
THE BACK ROADS OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
NEW HAMPSHIRE YOU GO THE SMALL
LITTLE LANES, THE SIGNS I SEE
MOST THERE ARE FOR JOHN KASICH.
AND THAT'S A SIGN HE'S BEEN HERE
A LONG TIME AND HE HAS
INDIVIDUALS SUPPORTING HIM AND
NOT JUST A LARGE CAMPAIGN TEAM.
>> ALL RIGHT, THE NewsHOUR'S
POLITICAL DIRECTOR, LISA
DESJARDINS.
THANKS.
>> Brangham: LAST NIGHT'S
REPUBLICAN DEBATE YIELDED A SLEW
OF STATEMENTS THAT WARRANTED
FACT CHECKING.
SO HELPING US DO THAT, AGAIN, IS
POLITIFACT, THE ONLINE PROJECT
RUN BY THE "TAMPA BAY TIMES."
JON GREENBERG IS ONE OF THEIR
"TRUTH-O-METER" MONITORS, AND HE
JOINS ME NOW, FROM WASHINGTON.
SO JON, LET'S START WITH DONALD
TRUMP.
WHEN ASKED ABOUT HIS ECONOMIC
PLAN, TRUMP OFFERED THIS CLAIM:
>> RIGHT NOW, WE'RE THE HIGHEST
TAXED COUNTRY IN THE WORLD.
UNDER MY PLAN, WE CUT NOT ONLY
TAXES FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS, BUT
WE CUT TAXES FOR CORPORATIONS.
>> Brangham: JON, HIGHEST TAXES
IN THE WORLD?
WHAT'S YOUR VERDICT?
>> THE VERDICT ON THAT IS
FALSE.
I WILL SAY THERE ARE TWO WAYS
YOU CAN MEASURE TAX BURDEN.
ONE IS COMPARING TAX REVENUES TO
THE SIZE OF THE ECONOMY.
SO WHEN YOU DO THAT, YOU FIND
THAT OUT OF THE 30 WEALTHIEST
COUNTRIES IN THE WORLD, YOU SEE
THAT THE UNITED STATES RANKS
27th IN TERMS OF TAX REVENUES,
RELATIVE TO THE SIZE OF OUR
ECONOMY.
NOW, THERE'S ANOTHER WAY YOU CAN
LOOK AT THESE THINGS.
YOU CAN TAKE A LOOK AT TAX
REVENUES ON A PER CAPITA, PER
PERSON BASIS.
WHEN YOU DO THAT, UNITED STATES
DOESN'T FARE QUITE AS WELL.
IT RANKS 17th.
BUT IN NEITHER CASE SIT ANYWHERE
NEAR THE TOP, AND SO MR. TRUMP
GETS IT WRONG.
NOW THERE'S ONE LITTLE THING I
WANT TO MENTION AND THAT IS THAT
IF TRUMP WERE ONLY TALKING ABOUT
CORPORATE TAXES, AT LEAST THE
NOMINAL THE STATED TAX LEVEL ON
CORPORATIONS IN THE UNITED
STATES, IS AT ABOUT THE HIGHEST
IN THE WORLD.
BUT EFFECTIVELY, THAT TURNS OUT
NOT TO BE TRUE EITHER.
>> THERE WAS ALSO A LOT OF TALK
ABOUT ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION LAST
NIGHT AND TRUMP AND TED CRUZ ARE
AMONG THOSE WHO PROPOSED
BUILDING A WALL ALONG THE
U.S.-MEXICO BORDER.
BUT CRUZ ALSO MADE THIS
ASSERTION ABOUT UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS.
LET'S LISTEN.
>> PUT IN PLACE A BIOMETRIC EXIT
ENTRY SYSTEM ON VISAS, 40% OF
THE IMMIGRATION COMES NOT ON THE
BORDER ILLEGALLY BUT COMING ON
VISAS AND OVERSTAYING.
>> THE IS CRUZ RIGHT?
>> YES HE DOES ON THE AVAILABLE
DATA BUT THE DATA IS A LITTLE
BIT OLD.
INS THE GOVERNMENT AGENCY
STUDIED THIS AND THEN PEW
RESEARCH LOOKED AT IT IN 2006.
NOT THE MOST CURRENT DATA.
WE'VE BEEN IN TOUCH WITH THE
RESEARCHERS AND THEY AFFIRM THAT
THE NUMBERS HOLD TRUE.
IT'S AT LEAST 40% OF THE
UNDOCUMENTED IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> ONE IMMIGRATION FACT THAT
CRUZ DID GET WRONG, WHILE SAYING
HE WOULD DEPORT THE ESTIMATED 11
MILLION UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS, HE STATED PRESIDENT
CLINTON DEPORTED 12 MILLION AND
BUSH EIGHT MILLION, PRESIDENT
OBAMA IS THE RECORD HOLDER
DEPORTING 2.4 IS IMMIGRANTS TO
THEIR HOME COUNTRIES.
MARCO RUBIO WAS REPEATEDLY
ATTACKED BY CHRIS CHRISTIE.
>> UNDER CHRIS CHRISTIE'S
GOVERNORSHIP OF NEW JERSEY
THEY'VE BEEN DOWN GRADED NINE
TIMES IN THEIR CREDIT RATING.
>> JON IS THAT RIGHT?
NINE TIMES DOWN GRADED?
>> IF YOU WANT TO COUNT IT NINE
TIMES YOU'RE GOING TO COUNT IT
NINE TIMES AND CHRIS CHRISTIE
DOES HOLD THE RECORD FOR THE
NUMBER OF SITTING GOVERNOR STATE
DOWN GRADES.
THE CATCH HERE IS THAT CHRISTIE
REALLY CAN'T TAKE FULL
RESPONSIBILITY FOR IT ALL.
BECAUSE IT IS LARGELY, LARGELY
BASED ON THE PENSION FUND
LIABILITIES THAT THE STATE HAS.
THEY'RE AROUND $33 BILLION.
AND ESSENTIALLY, THE EXPERTS ARE
SAYING THEY'RE ONLY MEETING
ABOUT 38% OF THEIR OBLIGATION
WITH THEIR CURRENT SET-ASIDES.
THE ISSUE HERE IS THAT THAT
PENSION PROBLEM HAS BEEN
BUILDING UP FOR A LONG, LONG
TIME.
SO IT BELONGS TO BOTH DEMOCRATIC
AND REPUBLICAN PAST GOVERNORS,
AND THEY HAVEN'T DECIDED-- BY
THE WAY NOT JUST GOVERNORS, THE
LEGISLATURE TOO, TO PUT ENOUGH
MONEY ASIDE.
COULD CHRISTIE HAVE DONE MORE?
SURE HE COULD HAVE GOTTEN THE
LEGISLATURE TO PLAY ALONG, IT
WAS NINE TIMES.
THAT RATING SCALE IS MOSTLY
TRUE.
>> JON GREENBERG FOR POLITIFACT,
THANK YOU.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Brangham: FOR MORE ELECTION
2016 COVERAGE, WATCH OUR STORY
ON THE COMPLEX DELEGATE RULES
THAT LEAD TO EACH PARTY
NOMINATING A CANDIDATE, VISIT:
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Brangham: THE EARNED INCOME
TAX CREDIT IS WIDELY CONSIDERED
ONE OF THE MOST SUCCESSFUL ANTI-
POVERTY PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED
STATES.
IT'S ESSENTIALLY A FEDERAL TAX
REFUND FOR PEOPLE WHO WORK, BUT
EARN BELOW A CERTAIN INCOME
THRESHOLD.
LAST YEAR, MORE THAN 27 MILLION
INDIVIDUALS OR FAMILIES RECEIVED
THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT,
WORTH A TOTAL OF $67 BILLION.
IN TONIGHT'S "SIGNATURE"
SEGMENT, SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KARLA MURTHY REPORTS ON THE
MOVEMENT TO EXPAND THE CREDIT
AND ON AN EXPERIMENT HERE IN NEW
YORK CITY TO SEE JUST HOW THAT
MIGHT WORK.
THIS STORY IS PART OF OUR SERIES
ON POVERTY AND OPPORTUNITY IN
AMERICA CALLED "CHASING THE
DREAM".
>> Reporter: DONNA SOOGRIM WORKS
FULL-TIME AS A PREP COOK FOR A
MANHATTAN CATERING COMPANY AND
EARNED $22,000 LAST YEAR.
>> IT'S HARD, IT'S HARD.
ESPECIALLY IN NEW YORK.
>> Reporter: SHE STARTED FILLING
OUT HER TAX FORMS IN JANUARY
WITH THE HELP OF A NON-PROFIT
ORGANIZATION THAT OFFERS FREE
ASSISTANCE TO LOW-INCOME PEOPLE.
THERE'S A BIG REASON SHE'S
AIMING TO FILE EARLY.
AS A SINGLE MOTHER OF A 10-YEAR-
OLD GIRL, SOOGRIM ANTICIPATES A
NEARLY $8,000 TAX REFUND THIS
YEAR.
A BIG PART OF THAT IS FROM THE
FEDERAL EARNED INCOME TAX
CREDIT, OR E.I.T.C.
AND WHAT DO YOU PLAN ON DOING
WITH THAT MONEY?
>> SHE'S GOING TO SUMMER CAMP.
SO IT WAS JUST FOR SUMMER CAMP,
THAT'S ABOUT $3,000.
AND THEN FOR HER DAYCARE
EXPENSES.
>> Reporter: SO THAT MONEY
REALLY MAKES A DIFFERENCE?
>> YES, IT DOES.
>> Reporter: BUT THE E.I.T.C.
DOESN'T HELP ALL LOW-INCOME
EARNERS.
IT PRIMARILY BENEFITS ADULTS
WITH CHILDREN.
SO CARMELO NIEVES IS LEFT OUT.
HE MADE ABOUT $20,000 LAST YEAR
WORKING PART-TIME AS AN AIDE FOR
DISABLED ADULTS.
>> IT BENEFITS THE SINGLE
PARENTS WITH THE KIDS.
AND I'M NOT AGAINST THAT.
I'M NOT AGAINST THAT.
BUT YOU'VE GOT TO SHOW SOME
FAIRNESS IN THE SENSE OF,
ALRIGHT, WE GOT SINGLE ADULTS
THAT ARE WORKING JUST AS HARD AS
THEM.
>> Reporter: GORDON BERLIN IS
TRYING TO HELP PEOPLE LIKE
NIEVES.
HE'S PRESIDENT OF M.D.R.C., A
NEW YORK NONPROFIT GROUP FOCUSED
ON IMPROVING POLICIES AND
PROGRAMS FOR THE POOR.
>> IN THE UNITED STATES, WE ARE
MOSTLY FOCUSED ON POVERTY AS A
CHILD PROBLEM.
IT'S BEEN VERY HARD TO BUILD
SUPPORT FOR THE WORKING POOR WHO
DON'T HAVE DEPENDENT CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: BERLIN IS AN
ADVOCATE FOR EXPANDING THE
E.I.T.C. TO LOW-INCOME WORKERS
WITHOUT CHILDREN.
>> I THINK WE'RE FACING A CRISIS
IN LOW-WAGE WORK, AND IT
THREATENS THE AMERICAN DREAM.
I KNOW THAT SOUNDS MELODRAMATIC,
BUT I THINK THE FACTS WOULD BEAR
ME OUT.
>> Reporter: FOR EXAMPLE, BERLIN
NOTES, THAT A MALE WHO ONLY
GRADUATES FROM HIGH SCHOOL EARNS
14% LESS TODAY THAN HE DID IN
1975, ADJUSTED FOR INFLATION,
ACCORDING TO THE U.S. CENSUS
BUREAU.
>> IT'S LEADING TO LOWER
EMPLOYMENT RATES.
SO WE NEED TO GET WORK AT THE
LOW END TO PAY AGAIN, AND THE
EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT IS ONE
OF THE MOST PROMISING VEHICLES
FOR DOING THAT.
>> Reporter: EXPANDING THE
E.I.T.C. HAS BIPARTISAN SUPPORT
IN WASHINGTON.
THIS WAS REPUBLICAN PAUL RYAN
MORE THAN A YEAR BEFORE HE WAS
ELECTED SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES:
>> WE SHOULD MAKE SURE THAT IN
THIS COUNTRY, IT ALWAYS PAYS TO
WORK.
I WOULD DO THAT BY INCREASING
THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR
CHILDLESS WORKERS.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT OBAMA
REITERATED HIS CALL FOR THE SAME
CHANGE IN HIS STATE OF THE UNION
ADDRESS LAST MONTH.
>> I'D WELCOME A SERIOUS
DISCUSSION ABOUT STRATEGIES WE
CAN ALL SUPPORT, LIKE EXPANDING
TAX CUTS FOR LOW-INCOME WORKERS
WHO DON'T HAVE CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: CURRENTLY, TO
QUALIFY FOR THE E.I.T.C., A
CHILDLESS WORKER HAS TO BE AT
LEAST 25 YEARS OLD AND EARN
BELOW $15,000 A YEAR, WHILE A
SINGLE PARENT WITH THREE KIDS
CAN EARN ALMOST $48,000.
AND THE MAXIMUM CREDIT A
CHILDLESS ADULT CAN GET IS ABOUT
$500, ONE-TWELFTH OF THE MORE
THAN $6,000 A SINGLE PARENT WITH
THREE KIDS COULD RECEIVE.
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND SPEAKER RYAN
HAVE MADE SIMILAR PROPOSALS:
DOUBLING THE EXISTING CREDIT,
LOWERING THE ELIGIBILITY AGE TO
21, AND INCREASING THE MAXIMUM
ELIGIBLE INCOME TO ABOUT
$18,000.
THAT WOULD MAKE ABOUT SIX
MILLION MORE LOW-INCOME WORKERS
ELIGIBLE FOR THE E.I.T.C.
BUT IT WOULD COME AT SIGNIFICANT
COST: AT LEAST $5.5 BILLION A
YEAR IN NEW FEDERAL SPENDING,
ACCORDING TO THE OFFICE OF
MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW TO PAY FOR
AN E.I.T.C. EXPANSION ARE ONE
REASON BIPARTISAN EFFORTS HAVE
STALLED IN WASHINGTON.
BUT HERE IN NEW YORK CITY,
EXPANDING THE E.I.T.C. FOR SOME
SINGLE WORKERS IS ALREADY
UNDERWAY.
IT'S A PILOT PROJECT CALLED
"PAYCHECK PLUS," AND HERE'S HOW
IT WORKS: THE EXISTING E.I.T.C.
FOR WORKERS WITHOUT DEPENDENT
CHILDREN IS BEING SUPPLEMENTED.
PARTICIPANTS WHO EARN LESS THAN
$30,000 A YEAR ARE ELIGIBLE FOR
A BONUS OF UP TO $2,000,
DEPENDING ON HOW MUCH THEY
EARNED.
GORDON BERLIN'S ORGANIZATION,
M.D.R.C., IS RUNNING THE THREE-
YEAR DEMONSTRATION PROJECT OF
"PAYCHECK PLUS."
3,000 NEW YORKERS ARE ENROLLED,
ALONG WITH A CONTROL GROUP OF
WORKERS NOT RECEIVING THE BONUS.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF UNCERTAINTY
ABOUT WHETHER SINGLES AND MEN
WOULD RESPOND IN THE SAME WAY
THAT FATHERS AND MOTHERS OF
DEPENDENT CHILDREN HAVE
RESPONDED.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT EFFECT IT
MIGHT HAVE ON POVERTY OR INCOME
OR HARDSHIP.
AND WE CERTAINLY DON'T KNOW WHAT
THE EFFECTS ON EMPLOYMENT AND
EARNINGS WILL BE.
>> Reporter: THE TOTAL COST OF
PROJECT, INCLUDING THE BONUSES,
IS ABOUT $12 MILLION, AND IS
FUNDED MOSTLY BY NEW YORK CITY
WITH SUPPORT FROM THE FEDERAL
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES AND PRIVATE
FOUNDATIONS.
WHILE CARMELO NIEVES DOESN'T
BENEFIT FROM THE FEDERAL
E.I.T.C., HE RECEIVED ABOUT
$1,500 FROM NEW YORK'S "PAYCHECK
PLUS" LAST YEAR.
>> I JUST PUT IT AWAY, RAINY
DAYS.
YOU KNOW, PAID A COUPLE BILLS.
BUT I'M SINGLE, SO I DON'T HAVE
NO KIDS OR ANYTHING LIKE THAT,
SO I PUT IT AWAY.
>> Reporter: HOW HARD HAS IT
BEEN JUST TO FIND A JOB THAT
PAYS ENOUGH SO THAT YOU CAN LIVE
HERE?
>> IT'S VERY HARD.
IF YOU DON'T KNOW NOBODY, THAT'S
GOING TO HURT.
AND SOMETIMES JUST YOUR
EDUCATION BACKGROUND ALSO HURTS
YOU TOO, BECAUSE NOBODY WANTS TO
HIRE PEOPLE THAT JUST HAVE A
HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA.
>> ARE YOU PART OF "PAYCHECK
PLUS"?
>> I AM.
>> YOU ARE..
CAN YOU SIGN RIGHT HERE?
>> OF COURSE I COULD.
>> Reporter: ALVIN MARTINEZ IS
ANOTHER "PAYCHECK PLUS"
PARTICIPANT.
HE WORKS AS A TRANSPORTATION
COORDINATOR FOR A NON-PROFIT
ORGANIZATION THAT PROVIDES
SHELTER AND JOBS FOR THE
HOMELESS.
AT TAX TIME LAST YEAR, HE SAYS
SOME EXTRA MONEY WOULD HAVE
REALLY HELPED HIM PAY BILLS.
>> I HAD DEBTS, YOU KNOW.
I WAS HARDLY BRINGING ANYTHING
TO THE TABLE HERE, BECAUSE I WAS
OUT WITHOUT WORK PRIOR TO THAT
JOB FOR ABOUT SIX MONTHS.
>> Reporter: FILING HIS TAXES AS
A SINGLE PERSON WITH NO
DEPENDENTS, MARTINEZ WAS NOT
ELIGIBLE FOR THE FEDERAL
E.I.T.C.
HE IS A FATHER OF THREE
CHILDREN, BUT NONE LIVE WITH
HIM.
ABOUT 12% OF "PAYCHECK PLUS"
PARTICIPANTS ARE NON-CUSTODIAL
PARENTS LIKE HIM.
MARTINEZ QUALIFIED FOR A
"PAYCHECK PLUS" BONUS OF NEARLY
$500, BUT HE DIDN'T GET TO KEEP
THE MONEY.
LIKE THE FEDERAL E.I.T.C., THE
BONUS IS SUBJECT TO CHILD
SUPPORT CLAIMS.
>> THE CHECK WAS INTERCEPTED,
AND IT WENT TO THE CHILD SUPPORT
ENFORCEMENT UNIT.
I'M TELLING YOU, I SMILED.
I WAS REALLY HAPPY ABOUT IT.
I WASN'T ANNOYED WITH IT AT ALL.
IT WAS FANTASTIC.
SOMETHING WAS GETTING PAID IN
THAT DIRECTION, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: THAT WASN'T HANGING
OVER YOUR HEAD ANYMORE.
>> EXACTLY MY POINT.
>> Reporter: RESEARCHERS ARE
STUDYING WHETHER THE BONUS'
IMPROVES THINGS LIKE CHILD
SUPPORT PAYMENTS OR REDUCES
INVOLVEMENT IN THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM, AND, WHETHER THE
INCENTIVE OF EXTRA MONEY
ENCOURAGES PEOPLE WHO AREN'T
WORKING TO FIND JOBS.
>> I THINK THE E.I.T.C.'S VERY
SUCCESSFUL.
I CERTAINLY SUPPORT IT.
BUT ITS MAIN EFFECT IS TO
INCREASE EARNINGS ON A PART OF
PEOPLE WHO ARE ALREADY WORKING.
>> Reporter: LAWRENCE MEAD IS A
PROFESSOR AT NEW YORK UNIVERSITY
AND A VISITING SCHOLAR AT THE
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE,
A CONSERVATIVE THINK TANK.
HIS ACADEMIC WORK HELPED INFORM
THE WELFARE REFORM ACT IN 1996,
WHICH SET TIME LIMITS ON HOW
LONG PEOPLE COULD RECEIVE
BENEFITS AND REQUIRED RECIPIENTS
TO WORK.
>> WE TRIED WORK INCENTIVES IN
WELFARE FOR 20 OR 30 YEARS
BEFORE THE ' 90S, WHEN WE
FINALLY
GOT SERIOUS ABOUT REQUIRING
PEOPLE TO WORK.
AND THAT IS THE MAIN REASON THEY
WENT TO WORK: THEY WERE REQUIRED
TO WORK.
>> Reporter: MEAD IS SKEPTICAL
THAT EXPANDING THE E.I.T.C. TO
CHILDLESS ADULTS AND NON-
CUSTODIAL PARENTS WILL BE ENOUGH
TO ENCOURAGE SUCH SINGLE LOW-
INCOME WORKERS TO GET JOBS.
>> THE EVIDENCE THAT I SEE IS
THAT THE WORK INCENTIVE IS
HELPFUL, BUT YOU ALSO NEED STAFF
PEOPLE TO SAY TO THOSE WHO ARE
ON WELFARE, OR WHO COULD BENEFIT
FROM E.I.T.C., THAT THEY SHOULD
GO AND DO IT.
THEY NEED TO BE PERSUADED.
THEY NEED TO BE SHOWN THAT THIS
IS A GOOD DEAL.
THAT'S WHAT WE DID IN WELFARE
REFORM, AND THAT'S WHY IT WAS
SUCCESSFUL.
IT WAS THE COMBINATION OF WHAT I
CALL "HELP AND HASSLE."
>> Reporter: WHEN IT COMES TO
RAISING INCOMES, THE EXISTING
FEDERAL E.I.T.C. HAS BEEN
BROADLY CELEBRATED.
IN 2013 THE CREDIT BOOSTED 6.2
MILLION PEOPLE OVER THE POVERTY
LINE.
BUT ADMINISTERING ONE OF THE
LARGEST BENEFIT PROGRAMS THROUGH
THE TAX CODE IS NOT WITHOUT
FLAWS.
THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE
CONCEDES THAT AS MUCH AS 27% -
OR ROUGHLY $18 BILLION A YEAR OF
E.I.T.C. PAYMENTS- ARE ISSUED
IMPROPERLY.
MOSTLY OVERCLAIMS, DUE TO
COMPLEX ELIGIBILITY GUIDELINES,
MISREPORTED INCOME, AND ERRORS
BY TAX PREPARERS.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, MANY LOW-
INCOME PEOPLE ARE MISSING OUT ON
THE E.I.T.C.; ONLY FOUR OUT OF
FIVE ELIGIBLE WORKERS CLAIM IT.
AND INCREASING AWARENESS HAS
BEEN A FOCUS OF THE I.R.S.
>> IF YOU WORKED AND DIDN'T MAKE
MUCH MONEY LAST YEAR, FIND OUT
ABOUT THE EARNED INCOME TAX
CREDIT AT irs.gov.
>> Reporter: "PAYCHECK PLUS" IS
EXPANDING TO ATLANTA, WHERE
RESEARCHERS WILL STUDY ITS
IMPACT ON A CITY WITH LOWER
AVERAGE INCOMES AND A LOWER COST
OF LIVING.
HERE IN NEW YORK, ALVIN MARTINEZ
SAW HIS INCOME RISE IN 2015 TO
NEARLY $28,000.
HE'LL STILL QUALIFY FOR THE
"PAYCHECK PLUS" BONUS THIS TAX
SEASON, BUT IT WILL LIKELY BE
ONLY A FEW HUNDRED DOLLARS.
>> I'VE DONE A LOT OF OVERTIME
THIS YEAR, AND I THANK GOD FOR
THAT.
AND I'VE NEVER WORKED THINKING,
"OH MAN, I MIGHT MAKE TOO MUCH
MONEY AND "PAYCHECK PLUS" I
MIGHT GET NOTHING."
NO, WHAT I RECEIVE, I'M GRATEFUL
FOR WHATEVER, TWO DOLLARS, FINE.
>> Brangham: THE UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL HAS STRONGLY
CONDEMNED NORTH KOREA'S LATEST
LAUNCH OF A LONG-RANGE ROCKET,
AND PLEDGED TO CONSIDER NEW
SANCTIONS.
AFTER A HASTILY-CALLED MEETING
TODAY, THE UNITED STATES
AMBASSADOR TO THE U.N., SAMANTHA
POWER, SAID THE U.S. WILL ENSURE
THE SECURITY COUNCIL IMPOSES,
QUOTE, "SERIOUS CONSEQUENCES" ON
NORTH KOREA.
THE U.S., JAPAN, AND SOUTH KOREA
SAID TODAY'S ROCKET LAUNCH COULD
HAVE BEEN A TEST OF A LONG-RANGE
BALLISTIC MISSILE, ONE THAT
COULD STRIKE AS FAR AS THE U.S.
NORTH KOREA SAID THE ROCKET IS A
PEACEFUL PART OF ITS SPACE
PROGRAM AND CARRIED A NON-
MILITARY SATELLITE INTO ORBIT.
NORTH KOREAN STATE-RUN MEDIA
RELEASED THESE PICTURES OF
LEADER KIM JONG-UN WITH CHEERING
MILITARY OFFICERS IN WHAT
APPEARED TO BE THE LAUNCH
COMMAND CENTER.
THE A.P. CAPTURED THIS VIDEO OF
PEOPLE WATCHING THE LAUNCH ON A
GIANT OUTDOOR SCREEN IN
PYONGYANG.
SOUTH KOREA'S PRESIDENT CALLED
THE LAUNCH AN "INTOLERABLE
PROVOCATION" AND SOUTH KOREA AND
THE U.S. QUICKLY ANNOUNCED TALKS
TO DEPLOY AN ADVANCED MISSILE
DEFENSE SYSTEM IN SOUTH KOREA.
EVEN CHINA, NORTH KOREA'S ONLY
MAJOR ALLY, EXPRESSED REGRET
THAT NORTH KOREA CHOSE TO,
QUOTE, "DISREGARD THE OPPOSITION
OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY."
IN TAIWAN, THE DEATH TOLL FROM
YESTERDAY'S STRONG, PRE-DAWN,
EARTHQUAKE HAS RISEN TO AT LEAST
26 PEOPLE.
RESCUERS CONTINUE TO SEARCH FOR
SURVIVORS IN THE COLLAPSE OF A
17-FLOOR APARTMENT BUILDING IN
THE CITY OF TAINAN.
170 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN RESCUED
THERE.
OFFICIALS SAY MORE THAN 100
PEOPLE REMAIN UNACCOUNTED FOR.
MANY ARE BELIEVED TO BE TRAPPED
INSIDE THE REMAINS OF THE
BUILDING.
THE UNITED ARAB EMIRATES SAID
TODAY IT WOULD BE PREPARED TO
SEND ITS SOLDIERS INTO SYRIA TO
HELP BATTLE ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS IF THE U.S.-LED
COALITION DECIDES TO DEPLOY
GROUND TROOPS IN THAT FIGHT.
THE U.A.E. HAS A MILITARY OF
SOME 75,000, INCLUDING A MODERN
AIR FORCE.
BUT THE FOREIGN MINISTER SAID
ANY U.A.E. DEPLOYMENT WOULD BE
RELATIVELY SMALL.
AND ONLY A FEW DAYS AGO, SAUDI
ARABIA SAID IT WOULD ALSO BE
WILLING TO PROVIDE GROUND TROOPS
TO THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS IF
ASKED.
ON THE EVE OF TONIGHT'S SUPER
BOWL THE NFL NAMED EIGHT NEW
MEMBERS TO ITS HALL OF FAME.
THE CLASS OF 2016 INCLUDE TWO
QUARTERBACKS, BRETT FAVRE
AND THE LATE KEN STABLER.
ALSO NAMED TONY DUNGY, THE FIRST
BLACK COACH TO WIN THE BIG GAME.
AND STAY WITH THE NEWSHOUR ALL
WEEK FOR COVERAGE OF THE NH
PRIMARY ON TUESDAY AND LATE
NIGHT SPECIAL RESULTS BROADCAST
THAT NIGHT.
THEN LATER IN THE WEEK ON
THURSDAY, GWEN IFILL AND JUDY
WOODRUFF WILL HOST THE NEXT
DEMOCRATIC DEBATE IN MILWAUKEE.
LIVE AT 9:00 PM, 8:00 CENTRAL
ON YOUR PBS STATION.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION,
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
GOOD NIGHT.